In recent years, the advent of large language models (LLMs) has revolutionized the field of natural language processing, leading to significant advancements in the generation of human-like text. A key innovation in this domain is Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) \cite{Gao2023RAG}, which enhances the performance of LLMs by integrating a retrieval step into the generation process. This approach not only mitigates the issue of hallucination—where the model generates plausible but factually incorrect information—but also improves the overall factualness and reliability of the generated content. At the heart of RAG lies similarity (vector) search, also known as k-nearest neighbor search. It diverges from traditional keyword-based search methods by focusing on semantic similarity. This means that documents are retrieved based on their meaning, rather than mere keyword matches, enabling a more nuanced and contextually relevant selection of source material for the generation process.
Similarity search plays a pivotal role not only in text-based applications but also in cross-modal retrieval tasks, such as finding images that correspond to text descriptions. This versatility underscores the technology's potential across a wide range of applications, from enhancing content discovery to powering sophisticated recommendation systems. The underlying mechanics of vector search are supported by various algorithms, such as Inverted File Indexing (IVF-Flat) and Hierarchical Navigable Small World (HNSW), among others, which are primarily optimized for CPU usage. These algorithms work by organizing data in a way that allows for efficient searching through high-dimensional spaces, a necessity given the complex nature of semantic search.
The performance of vector search, particularly in terms of speed and efficiency, can be dramatically improved by leveraging the computational power of GPUs. Unlike CPUs, GPUs excel in handling parallel processing tasks, making them exceptionally well-suited for vector search operations that involve computing distances between high-dimensional vectors simultaneously. This parallelizability significantly reduces the time required to retrieve relevant documents, thereby enhancing the responsiveness and user experience of applications powered by RAG and other semantic search technologies. As the demand for real-time, accurate, and semantically rich search capabilities continues to grow, the integration of GPU acceleration into vector search algorithms presents a promising avenue for future advancements in this field.


@article{Gao2023RAG,
  title={Retrieval-augmented generation for large language models: A survey},
  author={Gao, Yunfan and Xiong, Yun and Gao, Xinyu and Jia, Kangxiang and Pan, Jinliu and Bi, Yuxi and Dai, Yi and Sun, Jiawei and Wang, Haofen},
  journal={arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.10997},
  year={2023}
}